Document deployment process (#321)
DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service: docs/release-process.md

# Release Process

When releasing code, we take the view that the `master` branch is always deployable. Whenever
we merge a branch into `master`, this is automatically deployed into our staging environment
(known as `development` in the DfE Cloud Platform).

When deploying to production, however, we take the following steps.

## 1. Update the Changelog and create a pull request

> * Create a branch from develop for the release called `release-x` where `x` is the release number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a branch from master for the release called `release-x` where `x` is the next release number
```

Reviewer 2: Suggest `master`

> * Move all features from the `Pending` section of `[CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)` to a new heading with the release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Move all features from the `Pending` section of `[CHANGELOG.md](../CHANGELOG.md)` to a new heading with the release
```

> * Move all features from the `Pending` section of `[CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)` to a new heading with the release

Reviewer 2: I think the backticks need to be inside the link, or we get the link Markdown instead.

> * Move all features from the `Pending` section of `[CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)` to a new heading with the release

Reviewer 2: `Unreleased`, not `Pending`.

number linked to a diff of the two latest versions, together with the date in the following format:

  ```markdown
  ## [Release X] - 2019-01-01

  ...

>   [Release X]: https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/compare/release-x..previous-release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [Release X]: https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/compare/previous-release...release-x
```

>   ```

Reviewer 2: Worth noting that this link won't work until after the branch has been pushed?

> * Document the changes in the commit message as well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a commit for the release, including the changes for the release in the commit message
```

* Push the branch

> * Create a tag for the release in the format `release-x`

Reviewer 2: Let's not do this until the PR is accepted and merged to prevent having to get tags deleted on everyone's machines that have fetched if we decide to change the release commit.

* Open a pull request and get it reviewed

## 2. Review and merge the release pull request

The pull request should be reviewed to confirm that the changes currently in staging are safe

> to ship and that CHANGELOG.md accurately reflects the changes included in the release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to ship and that [CHANGELOG.md](../CHANGELOG.md) accurately reflects the changes included in the release.
```

## 3. Confirm the release candidate and perform any prerequisites

* Confirm the release with any relevant people (product owner, delivery manager, etc)
* Think about any dependencies that also need considering: dependent parts of the service
that also need updating; environment variables that need changing/adding; third-party
services that need to be set up/updated

## 4. Push the tag

* Once the pull request has been merged, publish the tag you created to the remote

## 5. Trigger a production release in Azure DevOps

Once the build has passed for the tag you pushed, you can deploy to production as follows:

* Log in to this project on [Azure DevOps](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/blob/master/azure-devops).
* Navigate to Pipelines > Builds.
* Find the build you want to release and note its build number (e.g. `20190717.2`). You can filter by branch using the filter / funnel icon in the top right.
* Navigate to Pipelines > Releases.
* Click on the 'Deploy release' pipeline.
* Click on the release matching the Build number of the build you want to release.

> * Click on 'Deploy Production' and manually trigger the deployment.

Reviewer 2: Prettier will probably complain about this bullet style, btw.

  [CHANGELOG.md](../CHANGELOG.md) to a new heading with the release number
  linked to a diff of the two latest versions, together with the date in the
  following format:

  ```markdown
  ## [Release X] - 2019-01-01

  ...

  [release x]:
    https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-teachers-payment-service/compare/previous-release...release-x
  ```

- Create a commit for the release, including the changes for the release in the
  commit message
- Push the branch
- Open a pull request and get it reviewed

## 2. Confirm the release and review the pull request

The pull request should be reviewed to confirm that the changes currently in
staging are safe to ship and that [CHANGELOG.md](../CHANGELOG.md) accurately
reflects the changes included in the release:

- Confirm the release with any relevant people (for example the product owner)
- Think about any dependencies that also need considering: dependent parts of
  the service that also need updating; environment variables that need
  changing/adding; third-party services that need to be set up/updated

## 3. Push the tag

Once the pull request has been merged, create and push a tag for the release in

> the format `release-x`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a note to make sure you're tagging the merge commit.

## 4. Trigger a production release in Azure DevOps

> Once the build has passed for the tag you pushed, you can deploy to production

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the build has passed for the newly tagged commit, you can deploy to production
```

# Release Process

When releasing code, we take the view that the `master` branch is always
deployable. Whenever we merge a branch into `master`, this is automatically
deployed to our development environment in the DfE Cloud Platform.

To deploy to production, we take the following steps.

## 1. Update the Changelog and create a pull request

- Create a branch from `master` for the release called `release-x` where `x` is

>   the release number

Reviewer 2: One last question: do we want to 0-pad the release number for alphabetizing? If so, 3 digits should be sufficient, I think.

Reviewer: interesting, I hadn't considered that... we could I guess?

Reviewer 2: It'll make it easier to tell what release we're on from a glance at the tags, and introduce fewer errors. I'm not particularly wedded either way, though.

Reviewer: do it.

Reviewer 2: Done.

Reviewer: Great! Let's get this merged when it's green.
